# Auditory competition in owl midbrain space maps

**Auditory competition and coding of relative stimulus strength across midbrain
space maps of Barn Owls.**  
Andrea J Bae, Roland Ferger, José L Peña  
Journal of Neuroscience 25 April 2024, e2081232024; DOI:
[10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2081-23.2024](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2081-23.2024)

Alternative repository to clone from (because of GitHub download quota)  
<https://gitlab.com/penalab/Bae-Ferger-et-al-2024>

__Abstract__

> The natural environment challenges the brain to prioritize the processing of
> salient stimuli. The barn owl, a sound localization specialist, exhibits a
> circuit called the midbrain stimulus selection network, dedicated to
> representing locations of the most salient stimulus in circumstances of
> concurrent stimuli. Previous competition studies using unimodal (visual) and
> bimodal (visual and auditory) stimuli have shown that relative strength is
> encoded in spike response rates. However, open questions remain concerning
> auditory-auditory competition on coding. To this end, we presented diverse
> auditory competitors (concurrent flat noise and amplitude modulated noise) and
> recorded neural responses of awake barn owls of both sexes in subsequent
> midbrain space maps, the external nucleus of the inferior colliculus (ICx) and
> optic tectum (OT). While both ICx and OT exhibit a topographic map of auditory
> space, OT also integrates visual input and is part of the global-inhibitory
> midbrain stimulus selection network. Through comparative investigation of
> these regions, we show that while increasing strength of a competitor sound
> decreases spike response rates of spatially distant neurons in both regions,
> relative strength determines spike train synchrony of nearby units only in OT.
> Furthermore, changes in synchrony by sound competition in OT are correlated to
> gamma range oscillations of local field potentials (LFPs), associated with
> input from the midbrain stimulus selection network. The results of this
> investigation suggest that modulations in spiking synchrony between units by
> gamma oscillations are an emergent coding scheme representing relative
> strength of concurrent stimuli, which may have relevant implications for
> downstream read out.

This repository contains the Python code used to analyse data and create figures
for the above mentioned publication.

## Files

### (Re-) Create Figures (Jupyter Notebook)

This notebook creates all Figures from intermediate/pre-analyzed data. This is
an ideal entry point if you want to modify figures to your needs or simply
present the same data in a different way.

*   `Figures.ipynb`

**Note: Intermediate data required** - When you want to re-run this notebook,
you need to have [Git LFS](https://git-lfs.com/) on the computer to which you're
cloning this repository.

### Analyze raw data (Python scripts)

These scripts contain the actual analysis from raw recording data to
intermediate results. This is where you find the detailed logic and parameters
of our analysis algorithms.

*   `analyze_flat_noise.py`  
    Analyse recordings with flat noise stimuli
*   `analyze_am_noise.py`  
    Analyse recordings with amplitude modulated noise stimuli
*   `analyze_elevation_tuning.py`  
    Analyse elevation tuning of units in population
*   `analyze_example_data.py`  
    Extract selected example data

**Note: Raw data required!** In order to run these scripts, you will need to
download the full dataset (approx. 50 gigabyte). You will likely also have to
adapt the paths in `settings_rawdata_path.py`. Please reach out one of the
authors if you want access to the raw data.

### Other Python files

*   `funcs_spiketain_correlation.py`  
    Analysis functions specific to spike train synchrony
*   `funcs_lfp.py`  
    Analysis functions specific to (gamma band) LFP
*   `funcs_amplitude_modulation.py`  
    Analysis functions specific to AM stimuli
*   `funcs_statistics.py`  
    Helper functions for the statistical tests we used
*   `funcs_plotting.py`  
    Some handy functions to make nice figures
*   `funcs_common.py`  
    Some other functions to handle or analyze data, used in various places
*   `powltools`  
    A current copy of our in-house package to work with original data (in HDF5
    format)
*   `matplotlibrc`  
    Settings for matplotlib
*   `requirements.txt`  
    Can be used with `pip` to install required third party libraries. We used
    Python 3.11 to run our analysis. Newer versions of Python and the other
    external libraries may work or not - especially newer version of
    `matplotlib` might produce slightly different figures.

### Data files

*   `curated_data/`  
    The CSV files in this directory contain the units/channels included within
    the analysis.
*   `intermediate_results/`  
    The feather files in this directory have been generated by the
    `analysis_*.py` scripts above and contain all necessary data for the
    `Figures.ipynb` notebook.  
    Note: You need [Git LFS](https://git-lfs.com/) to actually download
    these files when you clone the repository.
*   `other_figures/`  
    Drawing of the experimental design included in Figure 1.
